II. WHERE I LIVED, AND WHAT
I LIVED FOR
At a certain season of our lives we are accustomed to consider every spot as the possible site
of a house. I have thus surveyed the country on every side within a dozen miles of where
I live. In imagination I have bought all the farms in succession, for all were to be bought,
and I knew their price. I walked over each farmer's premises, tasted his wild apples,
discoursed on husbandry with him, took his farm at his price, at any price, mortgaging
it to him in my mind, even put a higher price on it, took everything but a deed of it, took
his word for his deed, for I dearly loved to talk, cultivated it, and him too to some
extent, I trust, and withdrew when I had enjoyed it long enough, leaving him to carry it on.
This experience entitled me to be regarded as a sort of real estate broker by my friends.
Wherever I sat there I might live, and the landscape radiated from me accordingly.
What is a house, but a sedge, a seat? Better if a country seat. I discovered many a site
for a house not likely to be soon improved, which some might have thought too far from
the village, but to my eyes the village was too far from it.
Well, there I might live, I said, and there I did live, for an hour, a summer, and a winter
life, saw how I could let the years run off, buffet the winter through, and see the spring
come in. The future inhabitants of this region, wherever they may place their houses, may
be sure that they have been anticipated. An afternoon sufficed to lay out the land
into orchard, wood lot, and pasture, and to decide what fine oaks or pines should be left
to stand before the door, and whence each blasted tree could be seen to the best advantage.
And then I let it lie, fallow, perchance, for a man is rich in proportion to the number
of things which he can afford to let alone. My imagination carried me so far that I even
had the refusal of several farms. The refusal was all I wanted, but I never got my fingers
burned by actual possession. The nearest that I came to actual possession was when I bought
the hollow-well place, and had begun to sort my seeds, and collected materials with which
to make a wheel-barrow to carry it on or off with. But before the owner gave me a deed
of it, his wife, every man has such a wife, changed her mind, and wished to keep it, and
he offered me ten dollars to release him. Now, to speak the truth, I had but ten cents
in the world, and it surpassed my arithmetic to tell if I was that man who had ten cents,
or who had a farm, or ten dollars, or altogether. However, I let him keep the ten dollars and
the farm too, for I had carried it far enough. Or rather, to be generous, I sold him the
farm for just what I gave for it, and, as he was not a rich man, made him a present
of ten dollars, and still had my ten cents, and seeds, and materials for a wheel-barrow
left. I found thus that I had been a rich man without any damage to my poverty, but
I retained the landscape, and I have since annually carried off what it yielded without
a wheel-barrow. With respect to landscapes, quote, I am monarch of the world, and of
all I survey, my right there is none to dispute. End quote.
I have frequently seen a poet withdraw, having enjoyed the most valuable part of a farm,
while the crusty farmer supposed that he had got a few wild apples only. Why, the owner
does not know it, for many years, when a poet has put his farm in rhyme, the most admirable
kind of invisible fence, has fairly impounded it, milked it, skimmed it, and got all the
cream, and left the farmer only the skimmed milk.
The real attractions of the Hollow Well farm to me were its complete retirement, being
about two miles from the village, half a mile from the nearest neighbor, and separated from
the highway by a broad field. Its bounding on the river, which the owner said protected
it, by its fogs from frosts in the spring, though that was nothing to me. The gray color
and ruinous state of the house and barn, and the dilapidated fences, which put such an
interval between me and the last occupant. The hollow and lichen-covered apple trees,
gnawed by rabbits, showing what kind of neighbors I should have. But above all, the recollection
I had of it from my earliest voyages up the river, when the house was concealed behind
a dense grove of red maples, through which I heard the house-dog bark. I was in haste
to buy it, before the proprietor finished getting out some rocks, cutting down the hollow
apple trees, and grubbing up some young birches which had sprung up in the pasture, or in
short had made any more of his improvements. To enjoy these advantages I was ready to carry
it on, like Atlas to take the world on my shoulders. I never heard what compensation he received
for that. And to all those things which had no other motive or excuse but that I might
pay for it and be unmolested in my possession of it, for I knew all the while that it would
yield the most abundant crop of the kind I wanted, if I could only afford to let it
alone. But it turned out as I have said. All that I could say then, with respect to farming
on a large scale—I have always cultivated a garden—was that I had my seeds ready.
Many think that seeds improve with age. I have no doubt that time discriminates between
the good and the bad, and when at last I shall plant I shall be less likely to be disappointed.
But I would say to my fellows, once for all, as long as possible, live free and uncommitted.
It makes but little difference whether you are committed to a farm or the county jail.
Old Cato, whose direrustica is my cultivator, says, and the only translation I have seen
makes sheer nonsense of the passage, quote, When you think of getting a farm, turn it
thus in your mind, not to buy greedily, nor spare your pains to look at it, and do not
think it enough to go round it once. The oftener you go there, the more it will please you,
if it is good. I think I shall not buy greedily, but go round and round it, as long as I live,
and be buried in it first, that it may please me the more at last.
The present was my next experiment of this kind, which I purposed to describe more at
length, for convenience putting the experience of two years into one. As I have said, I do
not propose to write an ode to dejection, but to brag as lustily as Chanticleer in the
morning standing on his roost, if only to wake my neighbors up. When first I took up
my abode in the woods, that is, began to spend my nights as well as my days there, which
by accident was on Independence Day, or the Fourth of July, 1845. My house was not finished
for winter, but was merely a defense against the rain, without plastering or chimney, the
walls being of rough weather-stained boards with wide chinks which made it cool at night.
The upright white hewn studs and freshly plain door and window casings gave it a clean and
airy look, especially in the morning when its timbers were saturated with dew, so that
I fancied that by noon some sweet gum would exude from them. To my imagination it retained
throughout the day more or less of this auroral character, reminding me of a certain house
on a mountain which I had visited a year before. This was an airy and unplastered cabin
fit to entertain a traveling god, and where a goddess might trail her garments. The winds
which passed over my dwelling were such as sweep over the ridges of mountains, bearing
the broken strains, or celestial parts only, of terrestrial music. The morning came to
bring wind forever blows. The poem of creation is uninterrupted, but few are the ears that
hear it. Olympus is but the outside of the earth everywhere.
The only house I had been the owner of before, if I accept a boat, was a tent, which I used
occasionally when making excursions in the summer, and this is still rolled up in my
garret. But the boat, after passing from hand to hand, has gone down the stream of time.
With this more substantial shelter about me, I had made some progress toward settling in
the world. This frame, so slightly clad, was a sort of crystallization around for me.
It was suggestive somewhat, as a picture in outlines. I did not need to go outdoors
to take the air, for the atmosphere within had lost none of its freshness. It was not
so much within doors as behind a door where I sat, even in the rainiest weather. The Haravansa
says, An abode without birds is like a meat without seasoning. Such was not my abode,
for I found myself suddenly neighbor to the birds, not by having imprisoned one, but having
caged myself near them. I was not only nearer to some of those which commonly frequent the
orchard, but to those smaller and more thrilling songsters of the forest, which never or rarely
serenade a villager, the wood thrush, the veerie, the scarlet tannanger, the field sparrow,
the whippoorwill, and many others.
I was seated by the shore of a small pond, about a mile and a half south of the village
of Concord, and somewhat higher than it, in the midst of an extensive wood between
that town and Lincoln, and about two miles south of that our only field known to fame,
Concord Battleground. But I was so low in the woods that the opposite shore, half a
mile off, like the rest, covered with wood, was my most distant horizon.
For the first week, whenever I looked out on the pond, it impressed me like a tarn high
up on the side of a mountain, its bottom far above the surface of other lakes, and as the
sun arose I saw it throwing off its nightly clothing of mist, and here and there by degrees
its soft ripples where its smooth reflecting surface was revealed, while the mists, like
ghosts, were stealthily withdrawing in every direction into the woods, as at the breaking
up of some nocturnal conventicle. The very dew seemed to hang upon the trees later into
the day than usual, as on the sides of mountains. This small lake was of most value as a neighbor
in the intervals of a gentle rainstorm in August, when, both air and water being perfectly
still but the sky overcast, mid-afternoon had all the serenity of evening, and the wood
brush sang around and was heard from shore to shore. A lake like this is never smoother
than at such a time, and the clear portion of the air above it, being shallow and darkened
by clouds, the water full of light and reflections, becomes a lower heaven itself so far above
so much the more important. From a hilltop nearby, where the wood had been recently cut
off, there was a pleasing vista southward across the pond, through a wide indentation
in the hills which formed the shore there, where their opposite sides sloping toward
each other suggested a stream flowing out in that direction, through a wooded valley,
but stream there was none. That way I looked between and over the near green hills to some
distant and higher ones in the horizon, tinged with blue. Indeed, by standing on tiptoe,
I could catch a glimpse of some of the peaks of the still bluer and more distant mountain
ranges in the northwest, those true blue coins from heaven's own mint, and also of some portion
of the village. But in other directions, even from this point, I could not see over or beyond
the woods which surrounded me. It is well to have some water in your neighborhood, to
give buoyancy to and float the earth. One value even of the smallest well is that when
you look into it you see that earth is not continent, but insular. This is as important
as that it keeps butter cool. When I looked across the pond from this peak toward the
Sudbury Meadows, which in time of flood I distinguished elevated perhaps by a mirage
in their seething valley, like a coin in a basin, all the earth beyond the pond appeared
like a thin crust insulated and floated even by this small sheet of interverting water,
and I was reminded that this on which I dwelt was but dry land.
Though the view from my door was still more contracted, I did not feel crowded or confined
in the least. There was pasture enough for my imagination. The low shrub oak plateau,
to which the opposite shore arose, stretched away toward the prairies of the west, and
the steppes of tartary, affording ample room for all the roving families of men. There
are none happy in the world but beings who enjoy freely a vast horizon, said Damodara
when his herds required new and larger pastures. Both place and time were changed, and I dwelt
nearer to those parts of the universe and to those eras in history which had most attracted
me. Where I lived was as far off as many a region viewed nightly by astronomers. We are
wont to imagine rare and delectable places in some remote and more celestial corner of
the system. Behind the constellation of Cassiopeia's chair, far from noise and disturbance, I discovered
that my house actually had its sight in such a withdrawn but forever new and unprofaned
part of the universe. If it were worth the while to settle in those parts near to the
Hyades, or the Hyades, or to Aldebaran or Altair, then I was really there, or at an
equal remoteness from the life which I had left behind, dwindled and twinkling, with
his fine array to my nearest neighbor, and to be seen only in moonless nights by him.
Such was that part of creation where I had squatted. There was a shepherd that did live
and held his thoughts as high as were the mounts whereon his flocks did hourly feed
him by. What should we think of the shepherd's life if his flocks always wandered to higher
pastures than his thoughts? Every morning was a cheerful invitation to make my life
of equal simplicity, and I may say innocence, with nature herself. I have been as sincere
a worshiper of Aurora as the Greeks. I got up early and bathed in the pond. That was
what they say, that characters were engraven on the bathing tub of King Chingthang to
this effect, quote, Renew thyself completely each day. Do it again and again and forever
again, end quote. I can understand that. Mourning brings back the heroic ages. I was ever a
as much affected by the faint hum of a mosquito making its invisible and unimaginable tour
through my apartment at earliest dawn, when I was sitting with door and windows open,
as I could be by any trumpet that ever sang of fame. It was Homer's Requiem, itself an
Iliad and Odyssey in the air, singing its own wrath and wanderings. There was something
cosmical about it, a standing advertisement, till forbidden, of the everlasting vigor and
fertility of the world. The morning, which is the most memorable season of the day, is
the awakening hour. Then there is least somnolence in us, and for an hour at least some part
of us awakes, which slumbers all the rest of the day and night. Little is to be expected
of that day, if it can be called a day to which we are not awakened by our genius, but
by the mechanical nudgings of some servitor, are not awakened by our own newly acquired
force and aspirations from within, accompanied by the undulations of celestial music instead
of factory bells and a fragrance filling the air, to a higher life than we fell asleep
from. And thus the darkness bear its fruit and prove itself to be good, no less than
the light. That man who does not believe that each day contains an earlier, more sacred
and auroral hour than he has yet profaned, has despaired of life, and is pursuing a descending
and darkening way. After a partial cessation of his sensuous life, the soul of man, or
its organs rather, are reinvigorated each day and his genius tries again what noble
life it can make. All memorable events, I should say, transpire in morning time and
in a morning atmosphere. The Vedas say, all intelligences awake with the morning. Poetry
and art and the fairest and most memorable of the actions of men date from such an hour.
All poets and heroes like Memnon are the children of Aurora and emit their music at sunrise.
To him whose elastic and vigorous thought keeps pace with the sun, the day is a perpetual
morning. It matters not what the clocks say or the attitudes and labours of men. Morning
is when I am awake and there is a dawn in me. Moral reform is the effort to throw off
sleep. Why is it that men give so poor an account of their day if they have not been
slumbering? They are not such poor calculators. If they had not been overcome with drowsiness
they would have performed something. The millions are awake enough for physical labour, but
only one in a million is awake enough for effective intellectual exertion, only one
in a hundred millions to a poetic or divine life. To be awake is to be alive. I have never
yet met a man who was quite awake. How could I have looked him in the face? We must learn
to reawaken and keep ourselves awake, not by mechanical aids but by an infinite expectation
of the dawn, which does not forsake us in our soundest sleep. I know of no more encouraging
fact than the unquestionable ability of man to elevate his life by a conscious endeavour.
It is something to be able to paint a particular picture or to carve a statue, and so to make
a few objects beautiful. But it is far more glorious to carve and paint the very atmosphere
and medium through which we look, which morally we can do. To affect the quality of the day,
that is the highest of arts. Every man is tasked to make his life, even in its details,
worthy of the contemplation of his most elevated and critical hour. If we refused, we would
or rather used up such paltry information as we get, the oracles would distinctly inform
us how this might be done.